
## Telescoping Sums

*2017 June 9*

> Find the values of each of the following infinite sums:
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{1}{x(x+1)}$$
$$\sum_{x=2}^\infty \frac{1}{x^2-1}$$
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{1}{x(x+1)(x+2)}$$
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{x}{2^x}$$

Okay, let's start with the first problem:
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{1}{x(x+1)}$$
This is a simple telescoping sum problem. Note that
$$\frac{1}{x(x+1)}=\frac{1}{x}-\frac{1}{x+1}$$
So, when expanded, the infinite sum looks like
$$\frac{1}{1}-\frac{1}{2}+\frac{1}{2}-\frac{1}{3}+\frac{1}{3}-...$$
Look! Each term other than the very first one forms a zero pair with some other term. They all cancel out, and we are left with
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{1}{x(x+1)}=1$$
as our answer. But wait a minute... couldn't we do an infinite sum like
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{1}{x(x+2)}$$
the same way? Since
$$\frac{1}{x(x+2)}=\frac{1}{2}\bigg(\frac{1}{x}-\frac{1}{x+2}\bigg)$$
then the entire sum is
$$\frac{1}{2}\bigg(\frac{1}{1}-\frac{1}{3}+\frac{1}{2}-\frac{1}{4}+\frac{1}{3}-\frac{1}{5}+...\bigg)$$
Now the only terms that don't get cancelled are $1$ and $\frac{1}{2}$, so the sum is
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{1}{x(x+2)}=\frac{1}{2}\bigg(1+\frac{1}{2}\bigg)=\frac{3}{4}$$
In fact, we can generalize this method of solving sums of this sort. If we have a sum of the form
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{1}{x(x+k)}$$
We can use partial fractions to set
$$\frac{1}{x(x+k)}=\frac{1}{k}\bigg(\frac{1}{x}-\frac{1}{x+k}\bigg)$$
And so, by expanding, we can see that the sum becomes
$$\frac{1}{k}\bigg(1-\frac{1}{k+1}+\frac{1}{2}-\frac{1}{k+2}+...+\frac{1}{k}+\frac{1}{2k}+\frac{1}{k+1}+\frac{1}{2k+1}+...\bigg)$$
Which can be rearranged to form
$$\frac{1}{k}\bigg(1+\frac{1}{2}+\frac{1}{3}+...+\frac{1}{k}+\frac{1}{k+1}-\frac{1}{k+1}+\frac{1}{k+2}-\frac{1}{k+2}+...\bigg)$$
All of the terms cancel except for those from $1$ to $k$, so we get
$$\frac{1}{k}\bigg(1+\frac{1}{2}+\frac{1}{3}+...+\frac{1}{k}\bigg)$$
and we have the formula
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{1}{x(x+k)}=\frac{1}{k}\sum_{x=1}^k \frac{1}{x}$$
or
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{1}{x(x+k)}=\frac{1}{k}H_k$$
where $H_n$ denotes the *nth* harmonic number.
Okay! Onto the next sum:
$$\sum_{x=2}^\infty \frac{1}{x^2-1}$$
We can split up the fraction into
$$\frac{1}{(x+1)(x-1)}$$
$$\frac{1}{2}\bigg(\frac{1}{x-1}-\frac{1}{x+1}\bigg)$$
And so, when we expand the sum, we get
$$\frac{1}{2}\bigg(1-\frac{1}{3}+\frac{1}{2}-\frac{1}{4}+\frac{1}{3}-\frac{1}{5}+...\bigg)$$
$$\frac{1}{2}\bigg(1+\frac{1}{2}+\frac{1}{3}-\frac{1}{3}+\frac{1}{4}-\frac{1}{4}+...\bigg)$$
$$\frac{1}{2}\bigg(1+\frac{1}{2}\bigg)$$
$$\frac{3}{4}$$
and so we have our answer:
$$\sum_{x=2}^\infty \frac{1}{x^2-1}=\frac{3}{4}$$

Are you noticing a pattern in these summation problems?

Suppose we have any summation in the form
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty f(x)-f(x+k)$$
or
$$\lim_{n\to \infty}\sum_{x=1}^n f(x)-f(x+k)$$
we can start by finding a formula for
$$\sum_{x=1}^n f(x)-f(x+k)$$
which can be found by expanding the sum and telescoping it:
$$f(1)-f(k+1)+f(2)-f(k+2)+...+f(n)-f(k+n)$$
If we assume that $n \gt k$, then we have
$$f(1)-f(k+1)+f(2)-f(k+2)+...+f(k)-f(2k)+f(k+1)-f(2k+1)+...+f(n)-f(k+n)$$
Which collapses to
$$f(1)+f(2)+...+f(k)-f(n+1)-f(n+2)-...-f(n+k)$$
and this is equal to
$$\sum_{x=1}^k f(x)-\sum_{x=n+1}^{n+k} f(x)$$
And our original infinite sum is
$$\lim_{n\to \infty}\Bigg(\sum_{x=1}^k f(x)-\sum_{x=n+1}^{n+k} f(x)\Bigg)$$
If $\lim_{x\to\infty}f(x)$ exists, then we can say that this is equal to
$$\sum_{x=1}^k f(x)-\lim_{x\to\infty}kf(x)$$
This is the formula for a telescoping sum:
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty f(x)-f(x+k)=\sum_{x=1}^k f(x)-\lim_{x\to\infty}kf(x)$$
Given that $k$ is a natural number.

Moving on to the next problem:
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{1}{x(x+1)(x+2)}$$
Using partial fractions, we can split up the fraction to get
$$\frac{1}{x(x+1)(x+2)}=\frac{1}{2}\frac{1}{x}-\frac{1}{x+1}+\frac{1}{2}\frac{1}{x+2}$$
$$\frac{1}{x(x+1)(x+2)}=\frac{1}{2}\bigg(\frac{1}{x}-\frac{1}{x+1}\bigg)-\frac{1}{2}\bigg(\frac{1}{x+1}-\frac{1}{x+2}\bigg)$$
and so our sum is equal to
$$\frac{1}{2}\sum_{x=1}^\infty \bigg(\frac{1}{x}-\frac{1}{x+1}\bigg)-\frac{1}{2}\sum_{x=1}^\infty \bigg(\frac{1}{x+1}-\frac{1}{x+2}\bigg)$$
$$\frac{1}{2}\bigg(1-\frac{1}{2}\bigg)$$
$$\frac{1}{4}$$
And so the answer to this problem is
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{1}{x(x+1)(x+2)}=\frac{1}{4}$$

Next up is a different type of sum:
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{x}{2^x}$$
Yay! Something that can't be done using partial fractions! This one telescopes in a different way. Look what happens if we multiply and divide the sum by $\frac{1}{2}$:
$$\frac{\frac{1}{2}}{\frac{1}{2}}\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{x}{2^x}$$
$$\frac{(1-\frac{1}{2})}{\frac{1}{2}}\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{x}{2^x}$$
$$\frac{1}{\frac{1}{2}}\sum_{x=1}^\infty (1-\frac{1}{2})\frac{x}{2^x}$$
$$2\sum_{x=1}^\infty \bigg(\frac{x}{2^x}-\frac{x}{2^{x+1}}\bigg)$$
Now look what happens when we write this out:
$$2\bigg(\frac{1}{2}-\frac{1}{4}+\frac{2}{4}-\frac{2}{8}+\frac{3}{8}-\frac{3}{16}+...\bigg)$$
$$2\bigg(\frac{1}{2}+\frac{-1+2}{4}+\frac{-2+3}{8}+...\bigg)$$
$$2\bigg(\frac{1}{2}+\frac{1}{4}+\frac{1}{8}+...\bigg)$$
Now we have a geometric series inside of the parentheses. That geometric series can be easily calculated to converge to $1$ using the formula, and we have
$$2(1)$$
$$2$$
and so
$$\sum_{x=1}^\infty \frac{x}{2^x}=2$$

Great. All of these sums were telescoping sums, but in a future post I hope to tackle a few infinite sums that cannot be solved in this way.


