
## Explicit Fibonacci Sequence

*2017 April 29*

> Find the formula for the *n*th term of the Fibonacci sequence.
> Find the formula for the *n*th iterate of the function $$f(x)=\frac{1}{x+1}$$

When iterating rational functions with linear numerator and denominator, some interesting patterns can come up, like with the function
$$f(x)=\frac{1}{x+1}$$

Whose first couple iterates are
$$f^2(x)=\frac{x+1}{x+2}$$
$$f^3(x)=\frac{x+2}{2x+3}$$
$$f^4(x)=\frac{2x+3}{3x+5}$$

It becomes apparent very quickly that the fibonacci sequence is emerging. In fact, we can write the formula for the *n*th iterate as
$$f^n(x)=\frac{F_{n-1}x+F_n}{F_nx+F_{n+1}}$$

where $F_n$ denotes the *n*th number of the fibonacci sequence (there are discrepancies online about where exactly the fibonacci sequence starts, but I'm letting $F_1=F_2=1$). This definition isn't a very good definition yet - it's still in terms of the numbers in the fibonacci sequence. However, there is an explicit formula for the terms of the fibonacci sequence, and its derivation goes something like this:

Notice that as $n\longrightarrow \infty$, the ratio
$$\frac{F_n}{F_{n-1}}\longrightarrow \frac{F_{n-1}}{F_{n-2}}$$

So that, for large $n$, 
$$\frac{F_n}{F_{n-1}}\approx \frac{F_{n-1}}{F_{n-2}}$$

And since the ratio becomes very close, the sequence begins to behave like a geometric one. Let $\phi$ represent this ratio. Then
$$\frac{F_n}{F_{n-1}}\approx \phi$$
$$\frac{F_{n-1}+F_{n-2}}{F_{n-1}}\approx \phi$$
$$1+\frac{F_{n-2}}{F_{n-1}}\approx \phi$$
$$1+\frac{1}{\phi}\approx \phi$$
$$\phi^2-\phi-1\approx 0$$
$$\phi^2\approx \frac{1\pm \sqrt 5}{2}$$

These are two separate ratios. We shall define them both as
$$\phi_+=\frac{1+\sqrt 5}{2}$$
$$\phi_-=\frac{1-\sqrt 5}{2}$$

Now let $G_n$ and $H_n$ be two sequences approximating $F_n$ so that
$$G_n=\phi_{+}^n$$
$$H_n=\phi_{-}^n$$

Both of these also have the same property as the fibonacci sequence; namely
$$G_n=G_{n-1}+G_{n-2}$$
$$H_n=H_{n-1}+H_{n-2}$$

If $G_1=G_2$ or $H_1=H_2$, then we could just multiply by a constant to get the explicit definition of the fibonacci sequence. However, the first two terms of $G_n$ are different, and the same applies for $H_n$.

$G_n$ is an overestimate of $F_n$ and $H_n$ is an underestimate, so perhaps $G_n-H_n$ will be a slightly better estimate. $G_n-H_n$ also has the property of the fibonacci sequence mentioned above. The first terms of $G_n-H_n$ are
$$G_1-H_1=\sqrt 5$$
$$G_2-H_2=\sqrt 5$$

Since $G_1-H_1$ and $G_2-H_2$ are the same, we can multiply by the constant $\frac{1}{\sqrt 5}$ so that we will now have a sequence $\frac{1}{\sqrt 5}(G_n-H_n)$ with the properties
$$\frac{1}{\sqrt 5}(G_n-H_n)=\frac{1}{\sqrt 5}(G_{n-1}-H_{n-1})+\frac{1}{\sqrt 5}(G_{n-2}-H_{n-2})$$
$$G_1-H_1=1$$
$$G_2-H_2=1$$

This sequence has the same definition as the fibonacci sequence, so
$$F_n=\frac{1}{\sqrt 5}(G_n-H_n)$$
$$F_n=\frac{1}{\sqrt 5}(\phi_{+}^n-\phi_{-}^n)$$
$$F_n=\frac{1}{\sqrt 5}((\frac{1+\sqrt 5}{2})^n-(\frac{1-\sqrt 5}{2})^n)$$

Which is the explicit formula for the fibonacci sequence. We can now  write a more exact formula for our iteration, but it will be pretty messy, so we'll skip doing that.

Perhaps this method can also be applied to similar functions whose *n*th iterates can be expressed in the form
$$f^n(x)=\frac{K_{n-1}x+K_n}{K_nx-K_{n+1}}$$

where $K_n$ is another sequence defined in terms of the two previous terms.


