# Reverse-engineering Hulu subtitles - yogurt, anyone?

A little while ago, my girlfriend and I were watching Burn Notice together on Hulu when we noticed something peculiar in the episode's subtitles. Fiona, the spunky Irish spy appearing as one of the show's three protagonists, had just stolen a tip jar from a street vendor in order to distract a police officer. The flustered vendor responded:

<div class="code"><pre>
You should arrest her.
!ยกEs una ladrona!
</pre></div>

Looks like a weird encoding issue, probably some Unicode being interpreted in the [Latin/Thai code page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO/IEC_8859-11). I haven't the slightest idea why this would be happening with a subtitle file, but naturally I was curious if there are any more strange instances of this throughout the episode (or in other episodes). But I wasn't about to watch the whole episode over again to look for these glitches manually, so I'd have to get my hands on the subtitle files in order to perform a text search on them.

Under the "network" tab of Firefox's browser inspector, we can see all of the resources that are loaded by a webpage. When I opened up Hulu and started playing an episode of Burn Notice, a whole bunch of new resources appeared. The network inspector shows the type of each resource, and many of these were of type `mp4` or `gif`, so I knew to ignore them, since they probably corresponded to the episode's audio and video respectively. After poking around in the remaining pile of external resources, I found a response of type `octets` from the following URL:

<div class="code"><pre>
https://assetshuluimcom-a.akamaihd.net/captions/487/4378487_US_en_en.smi
</pre></div>

A likely candidate! The content of this 90kB file looked like an unintelligible string of characters, but it turned out to just be base64-encoded. Decoding it gave rise to the following data (indentation mine):

<div class="code"><pre>
&lt;SAMI&gt;
	&lt;BODY&gt;
		&lt;SYNC Encrypted="true" start="0"&gt; c78729cdc2b218fdb3174eb72b602730&lt;/SYNC&gt;
		&lt;SYNC Encrypted="true" start="18018"&gt; 856fee84baf94714d541bfd66346ab28d438937a4b4be0b4ccbf0df7803e4a28&lt;/SYNC&gt;
		&lt;SYNC Encrypted="true" start="20120"&gt; c78729cdc2b218fdb3174eb72b602730&lt;/SYNC&gt;
...
</pre></div>

Rats, the subtitles are encrypted. But somehow they must be getting decrypted in my browser, in order for them to appear in their decrypted form in the captions box. So perhaps we can locate a function somewhere in the web page's Javascript that is used for decrypting the subtitles, and use it to decrypt them ourselves.

I found a Javascript file that I believed to be responsible for the media player, including audio, video and captions, located at a path that looks like

<div class="code"><pre>
player.hulu.com/site/dash/xxxxxx-site-curiosity/js/app.js
</pre></div>

The file consists of just one loooong line of Javascript code, all obfuscated and minified with meaningless single-letter variable names and enough nested closures to make your head spin. I expected it to be a real nightmare to figure out where the captions are being decrypted, but it turned out not to be so bad, primarily because the object attributes seem not to be minified, and therefore still have meaningful names. A little bit of hopeful text searching uncovered the following useful snippet of code, buried somewhere about two-thirds of the way through that single line of Javascript. I've added some spaces and indentation for readability.

<div class="code"><pre>
var i = this._captions[t];
if (i.encrypted) {
   var r = i.htmlText ? this._decryptCaptionText(i.htmlText) : "";
   i.htmlText = r.replace(/(&lt;br\/&gt;&lt;\/p&gt;$)/gi,&quot;&lt;/P&gt;&quot;)
                 .split(&quot;\n&quot;)
                 .join(&quot;&quot;)
                 .split(&quot;&lt;BR/&gt;&quot;)
                 .join(&quot;&lt;br/&gt;&quot;)
                 .split(&quot;&amp;amp;&quot;)
                 .join(&quot;&amp;&quot;)
                 .split(&quot;&amp;quot;&quot;)
                 .join(&quot;\&quot;&quot;)
                 .split(&quot;&amp;apos;&quot;)
                 .join(&quot;'&quot;)
                 .replace(&quot;\xA0&quot;,&quot; &quot;)
                 .replace(&quot;&amp;#160;&quot;,&quot; &quot;)
                 .replace(/&lt;P&gt;&lt;\/P&gt;/gi,&quot;&quot;),
   i.encrypted=!1
}
</pre></div>

It looks like this code is responsible for decrypting caption text, performing some text processing, and then sticking it into the text content of an HTML element, which is probably the node corresponding to the captions box. It looks like in this context, `i` is bound to a node on the DOM, and the parent object indicated by `this` has an attribute called `_captions` containing a bunch of encrypted captions (probably taken from the SAMI file) and a method called `_decryptCaptionText`.

I still couldn't tell you exactly what context this code is being executed in. It might be doable using a smart code editor and maybe some kind of deobfuscator, but it turns out that isn't really necessary. If we optimistically assume that these meaningful attribute and method names aren't *misleadingly* named, and that the above code snippet is executed at least once when an episode is played with captions turned on, then we can inject some of our own code to decrypt all of the captions at once and dump them to the console or to a text file.

Firefox has another handy feature allowing you to [override Javascript resources](https://superuser.com/questions/825802/firefox-override-websites-javascript-to-a-local-machine-javascript) for a given website, replacing them with your own local copies of those scripts. We can inject some of our own code into `app.js` by copying all of the code and adding a script override for this file pointing to our local copy. Then we can tamper with our local copy of `app.js`, and the browser should use our modified copy of this Javascript rather than the vanilla version downloaded from Hulu.

We can start by adding `let subtits = ""` to the beginning of `app.js` to initialize an empty string, into which we will load all of the decrypted subtitles. Then we can paste the following code into `app.js`, just before the location containing the code snippet included earlier:

<div class="code"><pre>
if (subtits === "") {
   for (c in this._captions) {
      let cap = this._captions[c];
      this._captions[c].htmlText = this._decryptCaptionText(this._captions[c].htmlText);
      subtits = subtits + `${cap.startTime} : ${cap.textContent}\n`;
   }
}
</pre></div>

Note that in the above snippet, we check that `subtits` is empty before loading all of the decrypted subtitles into it. This is because the method we're sticking our code into will probably be called several times, but we don't want to duplicate the captions in `subtits`. Now, when we play the episode and this method is called who-knows-when in the control flow of `app.js`, the string `subtits` should contain content like the following:

<div class="code"><pre>
0 : &lt;P&gt;&lt;/P&gt;
18018 : &lt;P&gt;[ Man Shouts ]&lt;/P&gt;
20120 : &lt;P&gt;&lt;/P&gt;
29095 : &lt;P&gt;[ Man Narrating ]&lt;BR/&gt;Covert intelligence involves&lt;BR/&gt;a lot of waiting around.&lt;/P&gt;
31565 : &lt;P&gt;&lt;/P&gt;
31598 : &lt;P&gt;Know what it's like&lt;BR/&gt;being a spy?&lt;/P&gt;
34267 : &lt;P&gt;&lt;/P&gt;
34300 : &lt;P&gt;Like sitting in your&lt;BR/&gt;dentist's reception area&lt;BR/&gt;24 hours a day.&lt;/P&gt;
...
</pre></div>

Lovely! Now that all of the decrypted captions are loaded into `subtits`, we can do what we please with them. Just so long as we don't download and redistribute them to other people online. Because that would be super duper illegal. We can do other cool stuff too, like injecting our own captions into the episode. For instance, say you have a legitimately-obtained copy of Spanish language subtitles for Burn Notice, which aren't offered on Hulu. You could just as easily add a snippet of code to replace the English language subtitles with some subtitles loaded in from your own local subtitles, although it might take a little work to write a function adapting your subtitles to the format that `app.js` is expecting.

As it happens, I didn't find any more out-of-place Thai characters anywhere else in that episode, or anywhere in the captions for the first three seasons of Burn Notice for that matter. Although, in season three, there are a couple of episodes in which the Unicode character `U+266A EIGHTH NOTE ♪` got turned into `â™ª` by downgrading to the ISO Latin 1 code page.

Of course I needed a trophy of some sort, so I decided to compile a list of [all the spoken yogurt references](https://www.reddit.com/r/BurnNotice/comments/fv6z1h/for_a_show_about_yogurt_burn_notice_is/) in the first three seasons of the show. I'd have gone further than season three, but that's all I've seen of this show so far, and I wouldn't want to spoil myself on any upcoming yogurt-related plot points!

<div class="code"><pre>
--- S1E1 ---
36.25 - Maybe you get a soda from the fridge or a yogurt.
36.28 - If you're caught, you just act confused and apologize like crazy for taking the yogurt.
55.07 - If you're hungry, there's a blueberry yogurt in the fridge.

--- S1E4 ---
12.47 - Just to the store to get some yogurt.
12.53 - All of a sudden, you gotta have yogurt? What's the big secret?
12.56 - No big secret. Just love yogurt.

--- S1E7 ---
25.38 - ‐ You want a yogurt or something? ‐ I had one. Not bad.
36.58 - eating my yogurt.

--- S1E8 ---
17.0 - Maybe a, uh, yogurt? [ Refrigerator Door Opens ]

--- S1E10 ---
12.19 - You know, I just remembered, I gotta get Mike some yogurt.

--- S2E1 ---
16.25 - Let's go upstairs, set you up with a beer, maybe a yogurt.

--- S2E2 ---
5.19 - Do it for all the yogurt you can eat?

--- S2E7 ---
26.17 - We got it covered. We're trying to find a place to put Mike's yogurt while we do the job.

--- S2E8 ---
4.06 - Uh‐huh. Still a yogurt man, I see.

--- S2E9 ---
6.46 - Got you a yogurt drink.
20.29 - [ Spoon Scraping ] Fi, is that my last yogurt?
20.53 - No, he's nice. I'm just gonna go out and pick up some yogurt. Be right back.

--- S2E10 ---
40.32 - ‐ You're here. ‐ I helped myself to a yogurt.
40.38 - I poisoned all my yogurts just in case you came by. Even you aren't that good.

--- S2E12 ---
22.18 - Where is he? He's out getting some yogurt. Why? What's going on?

--- S3E2 ---
3.09 - That would be a workbench, six power tools, four yogurts‐‐ three yogurts.

--- S3E3 ---
2.0 - I'm crazy busy. I need to finish my yogurt,

--- S3E6 ---
1.52 - Wow. That's like two days' worth of yogurt.
3.13 - So, Michael, you like the yogurt?
3.15 - I haven't tried it yet. I was always taught never take yogurt from strangers.
5.07 - So, who's the secret admirer? Whoever they are, they have good taste in yogurt.
42.01 - Not for the money, not for the yogurt, for the curtains.

--- S3E7 ---
38.06 - So you're saying I should eat a lot of yogurt?

--- S3E8 ---
30.29 - What kind of yogurt did you say you had?
</pre></div>
